CMOS-166: standalone deployment docs (#221)
couchbaselabs/observability: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/integrating-with-existing-deployments-collapsed.adoc

= Integrating CMOS with Existing Monitoring Stacks
:icons: font
:imagesdir: ../assets/images
ifdef::env-github[]
:imagesdir: https://github.com/couchbaselabs/observability/raw/main/docs/modules/ROOT/assets/images
endif::[]

[abstract]
You can integrate CMOS with your existing Prometheus, Alertmanager, and Grafana monitoring system. 
This tutorial documents how to configure each component in order to achieve this.

include::partial$tutorial.adoc[]

== Pre-requisites

The environment you wish to integrate CMOS into must have:

. At least one **Couchbase Server** node;
. **Prometheus**, with **Alertmanager** installed;
. **Grafana**, configured to use the Prometheus server as a Data Source;

==== Optional ====

- **Docker**, if using the Cluster Monitor's Docker image instead of the binary.

== Installation

=== Install Cluster Monitor

The Cluster Monitor can be installed as a binary (`.rpm`), or by downloading a Docker image.

**Binary installation**

> _Binary installation steps.... .rpm just install using package manager?..._

Reviewer: I'd only reference Docker until we have the RPM install steps (we've barely even considered it now)

> **Docker installation**

Reviewer: Can these be subheadings instead? Helps with accessibility.

[NOTE]
====

> We plan for the image to be distributed on DockerHub, but currently this is not available. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We plan for the image to be distributed on Docker Hub, but currently this is not available.
```

====

Run the Docker container, using the preview image given to you by Couchbase:
[source, console]
----
docker run -d --rm \
  -p 7196:7196 \ <.>
  --network cmos \

>   --prometheus-label-selector job=couchbase-server <.>

Reviewer: Unnecessary since we're not recommending auto-config (and it's not a valid argument to `docker run` anyway)

  --couchbase-user Administrator
  --couchbase-password password
  --name cluster_monitor \
  <YOUR IMAGE HERE>
----

ALSO ADD ALERTMANAGER URLS to configure cluster monitor to send to it

<.> If you are using TLS, you will need to add `-p 7197:7197` to also expose port `7197`.
<.> `job=couchbase-server` is a label we will create later in this tutorial when configuring Prometheus' `scrape_config` to scrape our Couchbase Server nodes.

=== Configure Cluster Monitor

Navigate to the Web GUI, which listens by default on:
- HTTP: 7196

> - HTTPS: 7197

Reviewer: We're not exposing 7197 in the `docker run` above - let's either change that to `7196-7197:7196-7197` or remove it here

Author: > If you are using TLS, you will need to add `-p 7197:7197` to also expose port `7197`.

Reviewer: Derp

Then click "Add Cluster" and enter the IP address of a node in the cluster, along with the cluster's configured username and password.
Repeat this for every cluster you wish to add to the Cluster Monitor.

=== Install the Agent on your Couchbase Server nodes

[WARNING]
====
This agent is experimental. Please read the https://github.com/markspolakovs/yacpe/blob/master/README.md[documentation], specifically its disclaimer, before installation.

> ====

Reviewer: I'd rather we didn't link to yacpe, since the fact that the agent integrates yacpe is really an implementation detail. TBH part of me is wondering if we need this warning at all - though your call.

See https://issues.couchbase.com/browse/CMOS-210[CMOS-210], which tracks the development (including documentation) of the Agent.

> As there is currently no documentation on the planned deployment, this section cannot be written yet.

Reviewer: Can we word this in a slightly user-friendlier style? Perhaps something like "Until this is ready, follow the instructions given to you by your Couchbase representative"?

Download them and copy them to a folder accessible by your Grafana installation. 

The relevant setting in the Grafana configuration file, typically named `grafana.ini`, is:

[source, console]
----
[dashboards.json]
enabled = true
path = <desired path>/dashboards
----

If you are using https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/administration/provisioning/[Grafana provisioning], you will need to update the `providers.options.path` argument in your provisioning configuration file (typically named `grafana.yml`) instead.
For example:

[source, console]
----
providers:
    - name: dashboards
      type: file
      ...
      options:
          path: /etc/grafana/provisioning/dashboards/
      ...
----

=== Grafana: Data Sources

Now we have the required plugins and dashboards installed, we need to configure Data Sources.

. **Cluster Monitor (JSON API)**, via the Web UI: click on _Add Data Source_ and select _JSON API_. 
  - The URL should point to the Cluster Monitor with a sub-path of `/api/v1`. The port should be `:7196`.

>   - Enable `basicAuth`, with the user and password you configured.

Reviewer: We don't configure it above (needs to be done with env vars) - we'll need to either add them in, or include the defaults.

          cluster: "Couchbase Server Cluster" <.>
----

<.> `username` should be set to a Couchbase Server user with at least "External Stats Reader" permission.
<.> `password` should be the password of the above user.
<.> `targets` should specify the addresses of all the nodes in your cluster.
    The port number needs to be the management port - use `:18091` if you have TLS enabled.
    There are alternative configuration options that do not require hard-coding the addresses - refer to the https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/configuration/#scrape_config[Prometheus documentation^] for more details.
<.> Any labels defined here will be added to **all** metrics from this cluster - you may want to configure e.g., `environment`, `datacenter` etc.
    The label `cluster` is required, and should match the name the cluster is configured to use in the Web Console.

Add another `scrape_config` job for the previously-installed Cluster Monitor:

.prometheus.yml
[source, yaml]
----
...
- job_name: couchbase-cluster-monitor
      basic_auth:
        username: admin  <.>
        password: password <.>
      metrics_path: /api/v1/_prometheus <.>
      static_configs:

>           - targets: [10.145.212.110:7196] <.>

Reviewer: Should this be a CB IP? Should we have something like `<Cluster Monitor URL>` instead?

Author: It's just an example of an internal IP, but yes that is possible

  For now this should be a single server IP, listening on port `7196`.

Restart Prometheus, and navigate to the Web UI. 
If this was successful you should see your cluster listed on the page `/targets`.

=== Prometheus: Alerting Rules

CMOS ships with pre-made alert definitions which can alert you about certain events in your cluster. 
To take advantage of these, first download the rule definitions to somewhere your Prometheus config can access them:

[source, console]
----
wget -O prometheus-rules.yaml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/couchbaselabs/observability/main/microlith/prometheus/alerting/couchbase/couchbase-rules.yaml
----

Next, modify your Prometheus configuration file to include this directory. 
For example, if you downloaded them to `/etc/prometheus/alerting/` then you would add:

.prometheus.yml
[source, yaml]
----
# Insert this at the top level of your prometheus.yml
rule_files:
  - /etc/prometheus/alerting/prometheus-rules.yaml
----

[NOTE]
====
If you have existing alert definitions, simply add the `prometheus-rules.yaml` file to the same directory, and specify `*.yaml` as the target for `rule_files`.

> ====

Reviewer: Should we just use the wildcard from the get-go?

Restart Prometheus once more, and navigate to the Web UI. 
You should be able to see the new rules listed on the `/rules` page.
You may need to unhide inactive rules.

=== Alertmanager

We assume that you have already configured Prometheus to send alerts to Alertmanager, and that Alertmanager has appropriate receivers created and configured.

Therefore, there is no additional configuration required.

> == Lets go

Reviewer: :) (but could we use a different heading here?)

Author: such as?

Reviewer: "Next Steps" or something like that? I know our docs aren't meant to be formal, but "let's go" seems a bit... too informal to me
